doc: revamp gc trace documentation (#572)
nodejs/diagnostics: documentation/memory/step3/using_gc_traces.md

# Tracing garbage collection

This guide will go through the fundamentals of garbage collection traces.

By the end of this guide, you'll be able to:
* Enable traces in your Node.js application

> * Interpret traces
> * Find memory leak source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Interpret traces
* Identify potential memory issues in your Node.js application
```

Rarely, one can find a memory leak by just using `--trace-gc` (in real-world applications)

There's probably a lot of stuff to learn about how the garbage collector works, but if you have to know one thing, it's that when GC is running, your code is not.

You may want to know how often and long the garbage collection runs.

> ## Setup

Reviewer: I'd move it to the separated `.md` file. Maybe `exercise.md` ?

Author: (Sorry for the wait 🙈)

My attention here is to provide a similar experience to what we got in a tutorial. Moving it to a separate file will create overhead and degrade the reading experience.

Reviewer: My concern is that it would need to be merged into the Node.js Guides along with the exercises package and I don't think it will work. My suggestion is to move it to a separate document and in the principal one (the one that gets merged recently in the nodejs guides) you include a mention to this exercise -- pointing to the diagnostics repository. What do you think?

Author: My idea was:
- in the guide
  - let the full readme with examples
  - add a link to the diag repository (to the `exercise` folder)
- in the diag repository
  - keep the `exercise` folder only

Sounds reasonable?

Reviewer: Ok. I'll review the document as a set of examples then

> For the proposal of this guide, we will use a simple web server empowered with [Fastify](https://www.fastify.io/).

Reviewer: As mentioned before, I strongly recommend using a minimal application. It will decrease the probability of a further change in this document. For instance, `fastify` can land a release that changes the output of this tracing and the user won't be able to reproduce it.

Author: >  It will decrease the probability of a further change in this document.

What if we use a native HTTP server?

> For instance, fastify can land a release that changes the output of this tracing...

The leak we tend to catch here is related to a `Set` that continuously grows, so I wonder how a fastify update could impact this? 

Also, If I choose a server it's because it looks like a real-world case, while scripting is often far from that, but maybe it's a bias. Let me know.

Reviewer: If you strongly believe the HTTP Server would be better, I will not block it. I'm just raising my point of view as a user as well.

1. Create a new project

```bash
npm init -y
```

2. Install dependencies

```bash
npm i fastify
```

3. Create a simple server (server.js)

```js
import Fastify from 'fastify';

const server = Fastify();
const entries = new Set();

server.get('/write', () => {
  const date = new Date().toString();
  // don't do this at home
  entries.add({
    date,
    arch: os.arch(),
    platform: os.platform(),
    cpus: os.cpus()
  });
  return true;
});

server.get('/read', () => {
  return { count: entries.size() };
});

server.listen(9999, (err, address) => {
  if (err) {
    console.error(err);
    process.exit(1);
  }
  console.log(`server listening on ${address}`);
});
```

> Even if the leak is evident here, finding the source of a leak could be cumbersome in the context of a real-world application.

## Running with garbage collection traces

> You can see traces for garbage collection in the console output of your process using the `--trace_gc` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You can see traces for garbage collection in the standard output of your process using the `--trace_gc` flag.
```

```
node --trace_gc server.js
```

It should output something like:

``` bash
[13973:0x110008000]       44 ms: Scavenge 2.4 (3.2) -> 2.0 (4.2) MB, 0.5 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
[13973:0x110008000]       75 ms: Scavenge 2.7 (4.7) -> 2.4 (5.4) MB, 0.9 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
[13973:0x110008000]      151 ms: Scavenge 3.9 (5.7) -> 3.4 (8.5) MB, 0.6 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
[13973:0x110008000]      181 ms: Scavenge 5.3 (8.5) -> 4.3 (8.7) MB, 0.5 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
[13973:0x110008000]      245 ms: Scavenge 6.8 (9.8) -> 5.9 (10.5) MB, 0.6 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
[13973:0x110008000]      271 ms: Scavenge 7.5 (10.5) -> 6.4 (15.8) MB, 0.9 / 0.0 ms  (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000) allocation failure
server listening on http://127.0.0.1:9999
```

Hard to read? Maybe we should pass in review a few concepts and explain the outputs of the `--trace-gc` flag.

### Examining a trace with `--trace_gc`

> The `--trace-gc` flag outputs all garbage collection events in the console. First, let me describe the composition of each line. We'll use the following line as a model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--trace-gc` flag outputs all garbage collection events in the console. The composition of each line can be described as:
```

Reviewer: I'd avoid first person communication

| 13973                                                       | PID of the running process               |
| 0x110008000                                                 | Isolate (JS heap instance)               |
| 44 ms                                                       | The time since the process started in ms |
| Scavenge                                                    | Type / Phase of GC                       |
| 2.4                                                         | Heap used before GC in MB                |
| (3.2)                                                       | Total heap before GC in MB               |
| 2.0                                                         | Heap used after GC in MB                 |
| (4.2)                                                       | Total heap after GC in MB                |
| 0.5 / 0.0 ms (average mu = 1.000, current mu = 1.000)       | Time spent in GC in ms                   |
| allocation failure                                          | Reason for GC                            |

We'll only focus on two events here:
* Scavenge
* Mark-sweep

> The heap is divided into "spaces." Amongst these, we have a space called the "new" space and another one called the "old" space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The heap is divided into _spaces_. Amongst these, we have a space called the "new" space and another one called the "old" space.
```

| duration   | The total number of milliseconds elapsed for this entry.                                        |
| kind       | The type of garbage collection operation that occurred.                                         |
| flags      | The high-resolution millisecond timestamp is marking the starting time of the Performance Entry.|

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Property</th>
    <th>Interpretation</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>name</td>
    <td>The name of the performance entry.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>entryType</td>
    <td>The type of the performance entry. </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>startTime</td>
    <td>The high resolution millisecond timestamp <br/> marking the starting time of the Performance Entry.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>duration</td>
    <td>The total number of milliseconds elapsed for this entry. </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>kind</td>
    <td>The type of garbage collection operation that occurred.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>flags</td>
    <td>Additional information about garbage collection operation.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

For more information, you can refer to [the documentation about performance hooks](https://nodejs.org/api/perf_hooks.html).

> ## Examples of diagnosing memory issues with trace option:

Reviewer: Couldn't we use it somehow? The content is pretty good.

Author: I use them in the body of the guide.
